[Music]
hello and welcome back
scientifically accurate are lovers to
the second ever episode of nailing
science with me astrophysicist dr. Beth
is modest
a meme like your wildest thought to
retailer least in banks and this week
our special guest is a mathematician dr.
Tom Crawford's she's very excited yeah
well I'm excited for sure I am also
super nervous because I've never had my
nails painted never tell us about you
researched right yes so I my PhD was in
fluid mechanics which is basically
modeling the movement of every fluid you
can think of
and when I say fluid I we specifically
use fluid rather than liquid because a
fluid you can think of as something that
changes shape to match the container it
is in the like air and various other
gases then of course you've got liquids
water maybe things like honey and they
can all be modeled by the navier-stokes
equations which are sort of the basic
way shion's
that we look at mats when we do in fluid
mechanics when a river enters the ocean
where does that river water actually go
so is that just modeling like where the
water is flowing in a river itself or
you think that like sort of the water
cycle that we all learned in geography
it's it's so it's kind of the water
cycle yeah but the water cycle sort of
says the water enters the river and then
it flows down into the ocean and then it
evaporates and is back in the air and
sort of yeah continues but it's more
what happens between leaving the river
and then going into the actual ocean and
then before it evaporates right I've
always wondered like you know does it go
to the bottom is it in the heart inside
it like just sitting around this is this
you know that's the question is this has
through some shark gills yeah so it's
not quite on the level of does it go
through this particular fish but but I
can see a cool collaboration between
yeah
what percentage of the world's water
goes through shark gills you have this
this water leaving the river and then
does it spread out equally in all
directions could be the first question
and then for a small River probably does
but then when you get to a larger River
you're on a much bigger scale mm-hmm and
so once you're on a larger scale you
start to feel the effect of the Earth's
rotation so the Earth's rotation sort of
acts on you would say a ten or a hundred
kilometer scale so you only really feel
it when you're either really really big
or you're moving over very long distance
the same way that like small storms on
earth don't rotate but hurricanes when
they get big okay because I say what you
generally find is as the river flows
into the ocean it's gonna turn either
right or left depending on northern
hemisphere so the classic myth about the
plughole
yeah absolute nonsense right but is
based on actual science yeah so so
that's the first major thing there's
gonna affect where your river water goes
then you've also got these sort of
actually let you guys okay have a little
think I remember entering the ocean yeah
the okay the speed of the water perfect
yes nailed it so it would we would
classify like make the speed as the
volume flux so that you did the flow
rate right we got at the river so that's
to do with how fast and also have beat
the river assist how much water is
coming out so I was thinking like
sighs if River opening but again they'll
come to the volume books and I just like
everything I can think of comes at the
morning books salinity yes
[Applause]
so kind of in general it will come in
and out to some distance because of the
queue the volume flux then the other
sartatia tells it to then turn so it
turns it sort of forms this big
whirlpool yeah water here this big well
for me and then as well as the whirlpool
as it comes back of itself if it flows
along the coast right yeah so and it's
only on the surface and then you've got
these this yeah comes out because of cue
it rotates because of X because it's a
rotation and then it flows along the
coast
does it create little Eddie's yeah to
seize it will yeah so you can have so
generally you'll have this large vortex
or Eddy who's that forming at the the
next to the river mouth and then if
there's a change in one of those
parameters right so usually it would be
a heavy rainstorm and Q changes
dramatically yeah your vortex might
become so big that it goes unstable and
then sort of becomes unattached from the
current and then sort of disappears off
you said like as its own little
propagating water that's cool okay I can
see these things like moving around yeah
so this brings me on to a question I get
so like the reason why we care where
river water goes is cuz more often than
not there's all sorts of stuff like it's
pumped into river exactly yeah yes yes
so does this mean that potentially
rather than just ruining our coastlines
it could you know have these little
vortices which just bud off and carry
pollution with them yes that can happen
it's it's a very specific set up because
it when they do become unstable and
become unattached and then propagate off
that requires this big change in the
volume flux so it's a big storm or
sometimes you can get it if you have a
very particular geometry of your river
mouth so like I know for example the
Gulf of Mexico it's because because it's
kind of nice and sheltered from the
ocean you get a lot of these Eddie's
coming off and a propagating just
because of the geometry so certain
situations
yes Co is the color it is because the
Gulf of Mexico is sort of a lot around
it didn't like the Caribbean which is
very close by which is obviously very
clear water turn blue so is it because
the shape is above Mexico with all that
sort of stirring up of like eddies and
vortexes that you get sort of like sand
and silt coming up yes plus the rivers
you you've got flowing in so you got in
the Mississippi it is just this song not
sort your silliest right right you think
New Orleans is basically built the
Mississippi Delta is all built in all
that sediment so you've got all of that
as well yeah so the idea was can we
recreate that situation in the lab where
we have very specific control over those
three things mm-hmm so we start off with
a big square fish tank okay if you like
picture a big meter cube fish tank okay
amigo meet a meter there's a meter
square and then like 60 centimeters deep
it was big so tents big tank and then
it's going to rotate mm-hmm so it's
gonna be filled with saltwater yeah
solution mm-hmm and you just put the
whole thing on a big turntable on my
very first week doing my PhD they take
me down to the lab and they're like oh
yeah this is your turtle you're gonna be
working with but please be careful
because it costs half a million pounds
Wow so that was especially when you're
working with water as well maybe there's
obviously lots of electronics around and
computers and because the because you
want a computer attached to the
turntable so you can have what your
camera's attached to it everything and
then you stick another box on top which
is your reservoir so that's filled with
fresh water and then the fresh water
flows down a hose pipe and then we have
to build the river mouth that if you
could just use the hose pipe and just
have that sort of it would be like a jet
mmm-hmm and if you sort of picture a
river just really behave like a jet no
like it's got a lot of water coming out
but it's not really projecting very far
out so first of experience we did we
just have the hose pipe receiving
spherical symmetry as well in real life
we know that is today so there's sort of
there's various reasons why that's not
perhaps the best idea in the world
the only was to have this sort of
rectangular box and then we filled it
with a sponge so the hose pipe was
feeding the water into the box but then
by having the sponge it meant that he
didn't just all flow out at home at the
front too quickly it allowed the whole
box to become full and then it would it
still had enough momentum from the hose
pipe to actually come out but not as
much as the house out by itself to shoot
out too far so that would then be the
the river mouth of the source like a
flow valve so that control how much
water came out and you could adjust the
volume flux rain check out my rain guys
looking they look Christmassy it should
be Christmas angry in and unless
Christmas joy is you had a video and
then it really delve into what was
actually going on here so I can see the
picture of the tank and all that and
then I was this video where I had some
nice bright colors which is presumably
the water
what were the colors representing cuz
basically I'm gonna give you nice
rainbow nails amazing like that so cuz
that's your experimental exactly yes
it's you day where they were filmed from
above yes you have your square tongue
from above yeah and then you put red
food coloring it's a freshwater nice so
we use red peony because and then the
multi colors must have been well added
in afterwards with a computer
so you have your your salt water is
black because that allows is that so
there's a light sheet on the bottom
uh-huh and you tap your cameras above so
all of the light passes through the
clear salt water
yeah and does the camera so that's black
okay yeah okay and as it passes through
the bits that are dyed red not all of
the light gets through okay yeah and you
can do a calibration to get the light
intensity and relate that to the depth
the current because if it's deeper
there's more food coloring blocking the
light and less light gets through and
then you just need to know nice it's
like nice and linear relationship I love
all this you know interior of a star we
just don't understand it like this yeah
so one of the the navier-stokes
equations themselves are one of the the
Millennium problems oh yeah I love these
tells about millennium yeah so these are
these are there or at least were in the
year 2000 was 7 biggest unsolved
problems in all of maths actually yeah
but we'll come to that so these the
seven biggest problems that would be
well deemed to be the 7 biggest problems
they're unsolved in math by a group of
leading mathematicians in the advisory
board and an treats problem you get a
million dollars for for solving it and
the fluid dynamics one was basically we
have the navier-stokes equations which
we mentioned at the beginning they model
every single fluid and there's quite a
lot of different behaviors in all of the
things that we touched on so each of
them gases water ice can be modeled by
the navier-stokes equations yeah because
like you get ice flows of Glacia closest
I could watch them like all day you have
the these these equations but we just
don't really understand them
mathematically
right yeah so you said the navier-stokes
equation themselves are just mass is
conserved and force equals mass times
acceleration okay yeah it's like the the
two most standard things you would
expect to be true for a blob of fluid
right yeah
it's that's why they work so well yes
they're so basic yeah but then they
actually when you sort of go through
deriving them you then get pretty awful
mathematical expressions and when I say
that I mean you know there are what we
would call singularities so lots of
points where you're dividing by zero
yeah I think never good yes like all the
singularities there black hole singing I
see Big Bang the universe was regularity
that the the wording of the problem is
great it says like the challenge is to
unlock the secrets of the navier-stokes
equation right like what kind of it I
think that was like on your exam yeah
this is the question yeah so you got a
million dollars if you do that
million dollars yeah canonic guys so you
have this really nice formula which was
basically saying that the depth of the
river is proportional to the rotation
rate the volume flux divided by the
gravity to something like the hour of
1/2 yeah but like a really nice simple
relationship yeah well give the numbers
it says your current will be for my
experiment to say 8 centimeters deep
yeah no I do my experiment and they
measure the depth with the current and
it's like oh look it's obviously starts
to zero because there's nothing
happening yeah when a chorus starts the
flow path starts to increase and then it
starts to flatten off features think
that about about 8 centimeters yeah
change your provinces and go you know
you should be 6 centimeters now and it's
about within within about 20 percent
which is pretty standard experimental
error it's it does a really decent job
so like it's not telling you how it gets
to that depth you can't really model
that increase yeah you can get a really
nice picture what the final depths going
to be and that's what you need when
you're for example trying clean up
pollution cuz he'll say the top 10
meters will contain river water below
that we're all good yeah you don't need
really big expensive systems that will
clean the bottom of the ocean maybe I'm
in pain
like a little equational yeah why don't
you write an equation on the board that
became like a copy that's one of the
navier-stokes maybe what if they want oh
maybe just the conservation if I do
conservation of mass yeah hurt
incompressible fluid okay
conservation trees a flu jacory squash
has constant density like water yeah
right because even anything try remember
the numbers at the bottom of the ocean
5,000 meters down water is only squashed
by 4% maybe you had a liter at the
surface it's no point nine six liters so
he squashed a tiny bit so basically is
incompressible yeah basically it's
constant a stick that's clearly you
right well okay thank you just something
in my head that's like if you put like
as much pressure as humanly possible
onto something it should just like
compress into like a solid I know that's
not how these things work it's really
hard to do this without channel do not
ruin my masterpiece didn't called it
okay your thing about if you squash
something I'm just gonna grab one if you
squash something enough it eventually
becomes a solid
it's basically what happens in a neutron
star yes so like to that extreme right
now you've got hook okay you don't have
to be like humongous Lamar you took
atoms and you've basically broken them
in to leave squash them so much the
electrons have come away from the
protons mhm
and then you force the electrons to
merge with the protons you squash them
that much basically you've arranged your
neutrons in like a crystal structure
very tightly packed as they can go like
you've lattice yeah and that's that's
what you get but not like with water
like you can't put on weight unlike its
molecules too like you depression yes
but there's a lot see yeah closer so the
numbers at Mastro's nominal do you like
you about people because it's kind of
terrible that's good the car looks like
the river one everyone has got sparkly
silver
directed might you like your thumbnail
right to complete the picture of the
cycle yeah right and the fact that we
this is all what we care about in like
pollution is the reason we care yeah
three-eyed fish yeah that's very good I
did I thought that would be hard to fit
on a daily so us there's way so ideally
I would have gone to the river right
right and been able to sort of collect
data there but the the sort of ships
that do that with with any RC they were
all fully booked or non other projects
or so I couldn't actually do that so
instead I happened to get a spot on a
ship which was sailing around the
southern ocean this is the James Clark
Ross okay so with with bass with the
British Antarctic Survey and we sailed
around the southern ocean for six weeks
the main project was trying to collect
data for climate models yeah and I sort
of tagged along because I was like well
you know characters known rivers but it
does have ice mm-hmm ice melts yeah and
the melt water will flow into the ocean
in much the exact same way as river
water flow out to the ocean so in theory
I should be able to still get data that
I can use in the para model and you were
like I'm not sure on the rise also yeah
you know northern coast of the
Netherlands or Antarctica there's a beer
you know so I spent six weeks pigs on
the ship and the data we wanted to
collect yeah for their climate models
you've got this sort of the best
readings following a storm right so not
only are we in the stormiest ocean on
earth we are then purposefully try able
to chase storms in the story is toasted
on earth to get the best readings so we
hit two fossil evans
so goes up to twelve for
is anything that isn't securely strapped
flies across the room including yourself
come on your bed they have a panel at
the side of your bed and a seatbelt
harness thing you put on when you're
gonna sit with this piece yeah it's like
it's insane and we hit about two weeks
in we hit the first force 11mm and there
it was hilarious because the the lead
investigator he's made up he's like
witness such good data and the captain's
like what is wrong with you you like the
hopefully not gonna sink but like this
is pretty we get the force out of store
and the fridge containing all the beer
oh god fellow so we had a few bits of
spirits but they weren't after like a
week or two but then we had this of the
person on board I know when a giveaway
who it was but somebody else is on board
who who was quite a resourceful
character right and and he was like
gasps don't worry just come down we'll
go down to the lab we then distilled
pure ethanol doing rid of the chemistry
experiments pure ethanol and then yeah
made made our own vodka in the chemistry
lab you know the way you went to become
to help that ethanol world and be like
let's go to the kitchen and there's
still some potatoes
you just get the impurities out of the
earth no oh yes okay then credibly worse
they're incredibly dangerous yeah
absolutely shook naba every other
billion years be done by not a
professional just blow hole they had
yeah and everyone like runs to the
window you just see it pop it up notice
to the ship yeah you've grown outside
fluid and people spotting stuff on the
edges of shares you know ship captains
and like cruise ship captains in
particular especially when you want like
whale watching tours we're really
careful because if there is something
like that where someone spots like a
whale or a dolphin or something everyone
runs to that side of the ship that's a
very very quick like transfer of weight
and so most crucially I'll I know that I
know it's about cruise ships cuz you
gotta rip the bridge of water lines feel
like they have huge water tanks and
cruise ships that they can drain and
refill depending on like weight balance
on the ship so they have to be ready
like if like there is a sudden like
weight challenge they can do that it can
adjust it so they were saying that like
you know how the cruise ships have the
bridges that stick out it's a little bit
like on the side they were saying that
those can touch the water before they
can recover yeah it's like a for just a
big degree a rule that they can get to
before they can like they'd be like
quickly refill the tank on the other
side of the ship and it all like rewrite
itself which is amazing based on the
experimental setup that Tom used there
was a really cool multicolored
visualization of where fresh water was
going when it went into the ocean and so
yeah you have the thing coming out and
it kind of starts going
round in a circle a bit and then it
spreads along the coast going right so
so Thomas cuticles are the coast
Thomas cuticle yes oh I could have
painted in a coastline yeah and the
colors represent duck okay so in terms
of rate in terms of scientific accuracy
that's pretty accurate
five out of five I'm gonna say for five
seconds you said I think we've I think
it's it's pretty accurate let's just
this ones maybe a little bit too fat
yeah in general the the current is is
widest near the river mouth right
lightly yeah it's coming
that's the only only slight prism
otherwise it's fabulous
and then how many how many times even I
think look ability like that's also it's
gotta be a five I think it's five out of
five for luck ability it just it kind of
catches the eye looks like a rainbow is
going on I think there's so many great
things about the look of it and then
obviously yourself as well just you know
yes all my nails I got a 2010 yeah and
then what about this time so I'll
explain the sound so it'll be here on
the pinky we have the beginning of the
water cycle we have a storm cloud ring
on this hand we've got a meandering
rhythm so you have the river itself and
then even the ox building whenever you
buy the changing nature of is on this
hand we've got the Whirlpool that the
eddies and currents form when they enter
the ocean and they can even break off
and travel into the ocean a little bit
so now we've got the evaporation of the
ocean back in to clouds on the pinky
finger
but then when on the thumb for when
people get this wrong and they don't
account for the pollution we've got our
cute adorable little 3-yard fish that's
really happy any bubbles as well see our
names
[Music]
going to call my three-eyed fish habit I
always thinking blinky so so in terms of
scientific Asperger's well I mean it is
I've know it it is the water cycle so I
think it's gotta be a five out of five
it is the water look ability it's good
but I think the multicolored Ness of
this is kind of drawing me a bit more
but then the fish is awesome yes cause
can you pick a favorite or would you
like to leave it to the views in the
comments to pick up a room well I think
the viewers have definitely commented
effectively sorry I think the viewers
should definitely pick their favorite
and comment yeah but purely based on the
fish nine point one next two point one
bonus buy it just like so happy he
doesn't care you know what I can't
compete with her know in the comments
which was better my or Michaela's
amazing water tank like tracking
experiments complete well that's
probably enough nail art for one day so
thank you all for watching we hope you
enjoyed that make sure to check out
Tom's a channel as well which I'll link
down below in the comments if you liked
that you know click the like button and
make sure to subscribe and get the bail
on as well and we will be back in
so with another unsuspecting scientist
which we will accurately paint
scientific nail onto their nails but
until now it will see you all next time
I smoked 10 a day by the way it's
because I was my cousin's wedding I
think I lost my voice twins in the end
zone
I mean nasty guy thing that they was
used for doing special effects in like
films and TV right is that you know when
when I was looking at like careers and
stuff when I was an undergrad they were
like basically they need mathematicians
physicists for when they explode a
building or break down open amazing is
they break for more tea t-shirt
everywhere we should all just be like
holding something but don't like getting
old together and then flat like you're
punching the table
my goal is to stay up while you're
punching the table it's fine it's fine
there's no upside down I'll do it upside
down I feel like I want to do that again
I've half done it upside down it's like
skew it committee I just like right
maybe you never need to do it again at
some point right yeah to say if it
wasn't my thesis is our lives only 255
pages
you